The jury of the Venice Biennale has said it would not give awards to artists from countries whose leaders are facing charges of crimes against humanity, in a statement apparently aimed at Russia and Israel.

The five-member jury of the art exhibition said it was committed to “the defence of human rights,” in continuity with the vision established by Koyo Kouoh, the Swiss-Cameroonian curator who was appointed to lead the 2026 edition of the biennale before her death last year. The jury stated that it would refrain from considering artists from countries whose leaders were charged with crimes against humanity by the International Criminal Court (ICC).

The jury is responsible for choosing the winners of the Golden and Silver Lion awards among the 110 artists participating in the event, which opens on 9 May.

Although the statement did not explicitly mention Russia and Israel, the mayor of Venice, Luigi Brugnaro, said the jury had informed his council that they were unable to give awards to artists whose governments were under investigation by the ICC. He added that it was an independent choice that the council respects.

The ICC has issued arrest warrants for Russian president Vladimir Putin over alleged war crimes committed against children in Ukraine, and for Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu over alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity in Gaza.

Biennale organisers have faced criticism for allowing Russia to reopen its pavilion at the event, which runs until 22 November. The jury’s statement came as the European Commission announced it had sent a letter to organisers stating it planned to terminate or suspend its €2m grant for the exhibition because of Russia’s participation. The biennale has 30 days to respond.

Italy’s government has also clashed with the biennale over Russia’s reintroduction. The culture minister stated that the decision had been made independently by the Biennale Foundation, despite the government’s opposition.

In February 2022, following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the biennale condemned the aggression and banned access to that year’s event for anyone linked to the Kremlin. Although Russia was never formally barred, it did not participate in the 2022 and 2024 editions.

In March, Ukrainian officials urged organisers to reconsider Russia’s participation, arguing that the biennale must not become “a stage for whitewashing war crimes.”